Good afternoon.
How are you doing?
I'm good, thanks. Excellent.
Alright, well welcome along to this afternoon session
on the Anzac Day Amendment.
Bill, lovely to have you join us.
We've seen your written submission. Thank you Philippa.
And we have five minutes set down for you
to speak to that today.
And you are welcome to leave some time
for questions in amongst that.
Over to you.
Thank you. Good afternoon.
Thank you for the opportunity to present
to this select committee representing this 54th parliament.
I stand before you as a free
and sovereign woman thanks to the Anzacs Anzac,
Australian New Zealand Army Corps.
Forged in the trenches bonded through hardship
and blood, cemented in loss
and inextricably bound together through the horrors of war.
The survivors who returned forever changed
different on the inside.
Some forever changed maimed on the
outside the great war unforgettable
at the going down of the sun.
We will remember them and we do unfailingly every year.
We remember them on Anzac Day, generation after generation.
Continue to honor and remember the lives lost, lives broken
and lives who returned forever changed.
We are not tired of honoring our anzacs.
We are tired of the government overreaching
to every facet of our lives.
Under the guise of inclusion we know it means exclusion.
Exclusion of the facts, exclusion of the history,
and ultimately exclusion of the truth.
To include people who were not even there
to include different nationalities to whom Anzac Australia,
New Zealand Army Corps has no meaning to include civilian,
to include future wars.
To include, to include, to include DIE.
Diversity, inclusion
and equity when linked together a poison poisonous
to families, poisonous to communities
and poisonous to society.
Good old fashioned pride.
Not the disgusting version being pushed forced
on society today.
The good old fashioned version where we are proud
to stand together, proud to remember together
and proud to celebrate together
the buildup is palpable within families.
All generations medals, polished, traveler made,
arrangements, made, boots shined suits, dry cleaned
graves, cleaned, tidied, and prepared to honor, remember
and lay tribute to our fallen anzacs Australia
New Zealand Army Corps.
This is pride. The pride of standing at a dawn ceremony
with shared memories to honor and mourn the many lives.
Sacrificed now to be watered down and negated
and minimized our shared experience of loss
and heartbreak with Australia, which is a bond
to be forsaken for the sake of inclusion.
How about we include some common sense which is not
as common as one might hope.
If it is not broke, don't fix it. Leave it alone.
We are on the precarious brink of World War III
and this government is wanting to celebrate
and honor future wars.
Can you hear that? Just a minute. Can you hear that?
Celebrate and honor future wars.
No mention of avoiding war. Include, include, include.
This is very disturbing.
We should be advocating for peace,
not foreseeing future war.
To honor and celebrate is there some pre-planned event
of which the citizenry have no knowledge
of which will make the future wars count?
Very disturbing indeed.
I have no desire to denigrate, be sert
or undermine the many nationalities
that fought in previous wars.
None whatsoever. They have their own countries
and regiments and units.
We are not obliged
to include all in sundry into our
shared bond with Australia.
It is not our duty to honor another nation's fallen,
especially as an afterthought at this late stage.
Undermining and watering down our own history, which
exclusively includes Australia, Anza,
Australia, New Zealand Army Corps.
Let us remember the day for what it means to us as a nation,
not as an inclusive day that has no meaning
or relevance to the shared history that forged it.
Let us remember in our own way as we have done so
for many generations without the meddling government telling
us it is for the good of all.
Leave it alone. The inclusive trip is sickening
and we are not the blind fools.
Some believe us to be. We see you.
This is about a fixed point in time history
that is celebrated and commemorated annually.
In 3rd of April, 2025 ministers Goldsmith and pink.
There was a press release and this is what it says.
The Anzac Day Amendment built is expected
to be passed in time for Anzac Day 2026.
Even if we don't want it changed,
it is clear the government expects it to be passed.
Like all the other bills we overwhelmingly said no to.
It seems it will be passed by Anzac Day 2026.
Mind blowing. They shall grow not old
as we that are left grow old age shall not we them
nor the years condemn at the going down of the sun.
And in the morning we will remember them lest we forget.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for your submission.
Uh, we've reached or we're a little bit over time,
but I think we've got the context of your views on the bill.
Thank you very much Ms. Landy.
Thank you. Alright, uh, our next submission
is Rex Landy and Person.
Afternoon. Good afternoon. How are you doing then?
Senator, thank you for this opportunity to present to you.
Pleasure. So we have five minutes set down
for your submission this afternoon.
We've received your written submission. Yes.
Yes. Take it as read to you. Kda.
I'm opposed to enfolding. Any more people into the Anzac.
Uh, commemorations Anzac stands
for Australian New Zealand Army Corps.
It doesn't stand for the Sikhs, it doesn't stand
for the Indians or the French or the English
or anyone else that stands for us and our cousins.
We went away as servants of the British Empire.
We are still subjects of his majesty.
But when we went to that war, we were subjects
and 25% of the world identified as British.
They were British. Right? We went away British.
We came back Australian and New Zealanders. We came back.
Kiwis and Diggers. That was where the start
of our nationhood was forged in blood.
There were many other things.
The New Zealand wars deserve their own time
and place and commemoration.
Don't fold them into this. It's nothing to do with Anzac.
The New Zealand wars. There's a clue there.
The New Zealand wars, not everyone all in sundry.
Do you think France raise a glass
to the Anzacs on Bastille Day?
Do you, do you think they raise a glass when they have their
commemorations for World War II D-Day when, you know,
all the flotilla went over
and rescued everybody in World War ii?
Do you think they raise a glass to the anzacs?
We are allowed our own things.
Just for example, uh, Indian Army Day Armed Forces Flag Day,
sari Day, and C Gil j Dwa day.
Those are just four of the, uh, commemoration days
that in India celebrate.
You think they think about the anzacs at all?
And I'm here to say no to it. We are allowed something.
This is, as Phillipa said, it's a fixed point in time.
This is history. You don't get to rewrite it just
because somebody gave out some rice in
East Timor and got triggered.
I'm sorry. And the UN have absolutely no sway.
They're unelected Sno ghosts.
They are not elected the United Nations.
And those conflicts, they're people who go
and watch wars they watch.
And if you keep doing that, we're gonna watch you some more.
So no thank you.
We don't need everybody to be included in everything
because your policies of inclusion
have now got us tampons in the boys' toilets and boys
and men in women's spaces. Thanks very
Much. No,
right.
Okay. Next is the I thought i'd, but there you go.
No, thank you. Thank you.
Just about every day,
every day, every day.
Okay. Members, we come to our next submission,
which is from the Royal New Zealand Return
and Services Association.
Uh, welcome along. Great to see you, Mr. General Williams.
Appreciate you taking time.
And we have 10 minutes set down for your submission today,
and I'm sure there'll be questions from
members if you can leave us any time. Thank
You. Thanks sir. And, um,
members of the select committee,
thank you for the time, um, to make a submission to today.
So obviously, uh, mayor General retired Evan Williams,
the Chief executive of the R-N-Z-R-S-A and, uh, Dr.
Andrew, um, McDonald,
who is the official R-N-Z-R-S-A historian
and our principal advisor Remembrance.
Uh, firstly, can I acknowledge, um,
the military service in the room?
And for those that have served
and the family members of the select committee, uh,
we acknowledge, um, your service.
Sure. Um, I'll just make a quick opening remark
and then I'll hand over to Andrew if that's possible.
Um, so as you are fully aware,
Anzac Day is probably our most important day.
Um, so, uh, we have considered the, uh,
the, the amendment bill.
Uh, within that light, obviously
that doesn't belittle the focus that we place on Poppy Day,
remembrance Day and what will soon become, uh, a version
of Veterans Day, uh, in the future, which, um,
obviously we're working with, um, minister Pen Con as well.
Um, the primary role of the RSA is to advocate support
and advocacy of for all veterans.
Um, and also as more relevant to this particular, um,
to this particular bill, is the opportunity
to make an oral submission on the other two key roles
that the RSA takes seriously, which is remembrance
of sacrifice and recognition of service.
So on that note, I'll hand over to to Andrew.
Um, the Royal New Zealand Return Services Association
recommends that the Anzac Day Act 1966 be amended
to include the significant number
of New Zealand veterans involved in war
and warlike conflicts since the end
of the war in South Vietnam.
This can be achieved rather simply by adding a broad clause
for war and war-like conflicts
to the existing section two of the Act.
The RSA is comfortable with the act remaining
otherwise unchanged,
and specifically the sections regarding the observance
of Anzac Day and Anzac Day trusts.
We seek more written clarity on the,
the various other points proposed within the Anzac Day
Amendment bill.
There are at least three main points
requiring further written clarity.
Uh, written supo uh, submission deals
with these in detail of the first point.
However, the Bill's novel, introduction
of the word recognition to what has historically been a day
of commemoration and reflection needs careful consideration
by juxtaposition alone the bill affords recognition greater
import than commemoration.
The direct and indirect implications of this proposed change
to the veteran community are unclear.
And specifically with regards to procedure,
policy and legislation.
We note that the bill does not appear
to negate the crown's responsibility
to recognize host Vietnam service in tangible form, such
as within the Hall
of Memories at the National War Memorial of the second point.
The bills step away from providing Anzac Day as an occasion
to remember those who at any time
gave their lives in military service
for New Zealand is unwelcome.
This group seems to be excluded
by the Bill's alternate proposal to recognize
and commemorate Kiwi surface personnel who die
or have died in training specifically associated with war
or warlike conflicts.
It is not clear to us after a close reading of the bill,
how many New Zealand service personnel who died in service
of their country at any time are affected by this portion
of the bill of the final point.
The bill seeks to significantly expand the number
of people included in Anzac Day commemorations.
It seeks to include non-military service
by New Zealand civilians in war
and war-like conflicts involving New Zealand.
Several, very, very historic examples are given.
It would appear the intent for including civilians
and Anzac Day commemorations is some kind
of official metallic eligibility for their service.
But it is not entirely clear to us whether
that's the case or not.
So in short, the bill intends
to make the act broader and more inclusive.
The encompassing of war
and war-like conflicts since the end
of the war in South Vietnam is welcome
and can be achieved as I mentioned earlier.
However, as an organization
and as a cohort of veterans, we need more written clarity,
uh, on how the bill proposes to treat service people
who died at any time in service of their country, as well
as the word, the introduction of the word recognition.
And finally how exactly uh, the non-military service
of New Zealand civilians will be managed
and treated. Thank you very much.
Good submission. Alright, thank you both for that, uh,
very good submission and I think some very, uh,
practical points made within that.
Happy to open to questions from members, Tim.
Sure. Um, thank you general. Good.
See again, thank you, um, Proctor as well.
Really good submission and I think there's a lot
of genuine engagement around the table
and wanting to make sure we get this right.
Uh, and and openness to, to
what you have to say in your perspective.
Mm-hmm. Um, I, there's a lot I I'd like to ask.
I mean, it's the, the part two,
which is the big part that changes.
Is that your concern about, about,
the first part was about non-New Zealands personnel.
Is that based entirely on the preamble?
Um, 'cause the, the, the preamble to the bill,
which talks about wanting to cognize
that, that it wasn't just New Zealand.
There were other allied countries that landed in Gallipoli,
but the bill itself actually says the commemoration is to to
to commemorating the role, um, the contribution
of all those who through New Zealand.
And it's very specific to just New Zealand
and the actual main text of the bill.
So is your concern just the way the preamble is written
or is there something in the body of the text?
Uh, well, it seemed to, uh, widen the explanation
or the description of those
who landed at the opening day at Gallipoli.
And as I recall, we wanted to know exactly in some detail
what that included so we could be sure of
what was intended. So
A as an example, if it just said the 21st of April each
year, brackets being the anniversary of the first, um,
landing of troops from New Zealand in
Gallipoli and left it there.
And, and that doesn't mean we're not denying the fact
that clearly there were Australians.
Clearly there were British
and some other nations potentially involved,
but it's the reason we picked 25 April.
That's 'cause the first time New Zealand has landed there.
Would that address those concerns for you?
Um, I think we were just, you know, altering a piece
of legislation as no small thing
and where an open-ended statement is made.
We just wanted clarity on exactly
who was intending to be included.
And that wasn't in the explanation that was
provided to the, the bill.
It was fairly wooly by my observation.
And, and what would be the view, and,
and it may be one for you general, what would be the view
of the RSA in terms of
who should be included regardless of this?
If this text is correct, what would you like to see?
Um, look, I, again, I would argue that the need to, um,
commemorate, which is the basis on Anzac Day
and what it was designed for in the first place, um,
should extend to those, uh, that were, um,
made the ultimate sacrifice beyond the original intent
of Anzac Day being the war to end or war.
It was supposed to be the last.
And then there's been a lot ever, ever since,
including right up until, um, our last for, um,
operation in Afghanistan.
So I personally believe that the extension of the bill, um,
to war and war like, um, operations
or deployments since Anzac Day, um,
includes those particular individuals who
have made the sacrifice.
And the recognition piece, I think, um, is just
that clarification as to where it stands in relation
to remembrance and commemoration.
To me, Anzac Day is a day of solemn commemoration and,
and reflection and remembrance.
So maybe in terms of enrolling reflection into
that definition as opposed to
or into the, into the Amendment act as opposed
to recognition fits more consistently
with commemoration and, and, and remembrance.
Um, I would, to answer your question, sir, about the, um,
you know, if we stop at the full stop at New Zealand,
New Zealand landing at Gallipoli, I'm comfortable with that
because, um, listening
to previous submissions, I totally agree.
Anzac Day is Australia New Zealand Army Corps.
Um, you know,
and I do think that that doesn't belittle
other opportunities
to commemorate coalition operations across the spectrum
of New Zealand's journey.
Um, but at the moment, Anzac Day was, was quite a solemn,
uh, remembrance and reflection of the birth of two nations,
um, you know, in, in Gallipoli.
Um, and having been had the pleasure of working in London
and seeing where we are actually recognized
beyond just Anzac Day, um, as a, a very,
very strong contributor, um, in many,
many occasions in the uk.
Um, you know, the previous submission that says, uh,
do we get remembered and ref?
We do. Absolutely. Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Um, so I actually agree that keeping Anzac Day for
Anzac, but expanding the recognition, the, sorry, reflection
and commemoration to include sacrifices
and service that has been made since
25th of April nine, you know,
1915. And, and if
I can just pick up on one small point and,
and I take the point that I think you make well about maybe
recognition and maybe that is better for a Veteran's Day,
and this is the day of commemoration,
but on the point about those who have died since
I take the view that we should be including those in
East Timor and Absolutely.
If you understand. What about those, um,
there's been a question about those who have joined in, uh,
preparation for operation.
So if you think of, um, the, uh, t uh, t uh,
SAS personnel diet and training,
but to be ready for counter
terrorist operations in New Zealand,
should this just be those preparing
for expeditionary operations?
Should it just be those actually on operations
that are remembered?
Or is there anyone wearing a uniform in perhaps a training
accident like a, uh, you know, that man
of bought off Canterbury or Michael Ross?
Yeah, look, I mean Michael Ross, um,
I was unfortunately the Commander Wire at the time, so had
to oversee the operation to recover him.
Um, and I have no, um,
con I have no, put it this way.
I remember him on Anzac Day. Yeah.
Um, as a, as a guy who had to go and visit his parents
and say, we've found your son.
Um, to me that is a day that is fitting for that to occur.
Same with, um, the young guy who fell off Canterbury
or the young guy that fell off the American helicopter
and up in, um,
and there's the, the, the lads who, who died on the mountain
in Rupe, of course, we,
and many of my colleagues remember those guys on Anzac Day.
Yeah. Now that, is that a personal thing? Yes, it is.
But could it, could it,
and maybe should it be a formal part of Anzac Day?
I don't see any reason why not personally.
Thank you. Thank you Laura. Mcc Clear,
And just to follow on from Tim's comment question, um,
isn't anybody in the defense force technically training
for like, activity?
Um, and I just wonder like where
that scope would go,
or do you think that we should include anybody
who dies even if they're Yeah.
In training exercises, because effectively the defense force
is there to defend New Zealand and at any point in time.
Mm, That's a great point that you make.
However, the explanatory note specifically says, um,
New Zealand service personnel who die
or who have died in training associated
big word associated mm-hmm.
With war or war like conflicts.
That's why that's quite, that's quite a shift away from, uh,
diet at any time.
Okay. While in service of their country.
And as we've just heard, there's a, a, a number of names
and events that would presently be incorporated within the
spirit of Anzac Day that are, uh, that are, yeah.
And, um, and have been for a very long time. Mm-hmm.
So, um, the present wording, unfortunate as it is, does
seem to exclude those who might at any time
and replace that with that connotation training associated
with a war warlike conflict.
And the meaning is very different between the two.
Would you be more comfortable with it being the other way
around, like you say, to encompass the people
that you think about anyway on that day?
Or do you think it is fair to say war
or warlike? I'm just your opinion?
Yeah, look, um, okay. From my personal opinion, it's the,
um, in terms of our definition of, of a veteran as,
as anybody that has mm-hmm.
Served today of the tested service mm-hmm.
To me, therefore, a, a member
of the New Zealand Defense Force who dies in training
or in an accident Yeah.
Kind of fits that broad narrative of what a veteran is
as far as we are concerned.
Yeah. Um, and again, from my professional experience
and having lost far too many soldiers for various reasons,
um, to me it would,
and again, I'm talking from a personal perspective here,
to me, it would make perfect sense to allow that opportunity
to, to think and to commemorate and to reflect
and to remember those service personnel mm-hmm.
Who potentially have passed away due
to an accident whilst serving their country.
Um, like a veteran recognition day doesn't necessarily
fit that concept in terms of reflection and,
and remembrance and commemoration.
Okay. Um, in terms of the purity
of the wording, that's quite clear.
But I would be, personally, I'd be more, more than happy
to ensure that we are allowing people to acknowledge
sacrifice whilst in service. Mm-hmm.
Moon. Yeah.
Look, I thank you both, um, for your submission.
And look, I, I, I can understand some of the concerns
that's, that someone are raising around, you know,
the Anzac Day being diluted
and, you know, one
of my great uncles has killed in the mm-hmm.
Gone Gallipoli Day, uh, and Gallipoli
and, uh, one of my grandfathers actually fought in the
second war, and the only other time anzacs were formed.
So I sort of, I I, I really understand that sense of
how important it is, but,
but is it, so your membership,
you think they're ha they're comfortable with this shift
that's been pro largely in this bill?
Um, from my, look, I've only been the chief executive
for six months, um, and it's been an enjoyable six months,
somebody challenging to say the least.
But anyway, um, yeah, look, there is this growing, um,
awareness that we need to, uh, understand the RSA is 106
or 109 years old.
Um, and we need to now move with the fact
that the organization, um, yes, Anzac Day was designed
for a specific reason at a specific time,
but since then there has been a lot of, um,
other deployments called for where New Zealanders has stood
and answered the call of the government of the day.
And as far as I'm concerned,
the membership are getting themselves into a position where
Anzac Day means more,
and the contemporary veteran dialogue is becoming more
consistent, um, of which many of you in the room are,
you know, are are members of that, that cohort, so to speak.
Um, and again, I'll ask Andrew this comment on this,
but from my perspective, a long answer to a short question,
um, the membership of the RSA
has suffered from not engaging
with contemporary veterans as best as it should.
And Anzac Day is really the only day we see contemporary
veterans lining up with the other cohort of veterans.
And we need to then basically, how do we then leverage off
that going forward with things such
as VE Veteran Recognition day and other initiatives.
So, um, yes, we all spare of thought for those
that wandered off onto the beaches
and Anzac Cove on Gallipoli on Anzac Day.
The, you know, the, the, the actual reason for Anzac Day,
but also then many of our minds wander
and we end up meeting our cohort contemporary veteran
cohorts on Anzac Day.
And that's another aspect of Anzac Day,
which I think is often forgotten, is
that social reengagement and reflection
and sharing with your comments.
Alright. Thank you both very much for coming in.
We really appreciate your insights into that.
And ultimately, we wanna make sure we get this, uh,
as fitting as possible.
It's an important piece of legislation
and of course the intent is to acknowledge that service
that has, uh, been given by so many on behalf of the country
and general on behalf of us.
Thank you for your service. Thank you for coming in as well.
Really appreciate your time. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, sir.
Okay. And the final submission
for today from the Southeast Asian Veterans Association.
Okay.
Good afternoon. Good afternoon.
Thank you very much for joining us online.
Uh, wonderful to see you.
We have your submission on behalf
of the Southeast Asian Veterans Association,
and we have 10 minutes set down for your,
uh, oral contribution today.
And I'm sure there'll be time
for questions at the end if you are happy
to leave us some over to you.
No problem. So I served between 1970
and 1977, uh, as part
of the Southeast Asian contingent service
in Singapore for two years.
And during my service, I served with people from three
separate, uh, conflicts, Korea, uh, only one
or two people, uh, Malay, an emergency
Indonesian confrontation, Borneo,
and quite a few, uh, servicemen in that category.
And quite a number of those
who had served in the Vietnam War.
And during my training periods
and post training, um,
although that's a strange term
because I don't think you ever stopped training, um,
there was no diminishing of the expectation held
by those people of my ability to perform.
I was viewed as one and the same as them, um,
and expected to meet their standards.
Uh, there was no differentiation between
the operational service and my non-operational service.
We all wore the same uniform, we all did the same job.
Um, and it's not until we left service
that we are struck with a
quite a significant differentiation
between those who've got now qualifying operational service
and those who have qualifying routine service.
Um, and within our training, the one of the key
factors is it's inclusive.
Everybody who serves as part of the same unit team,
regardless of of the size that that organization goes
to, we're all included.
And it's my suggestion that the this amendment, um,
doesn't include everybody.
Yes, it includes those who've got qualifying operational
service, but it doesn't include the rest of, um,
service personnel who don't have that, uh, service.
And in fact, I think Minister Pink is one of those
who falls within that category
for his service within New Zealand, not classified
as a, as a veteran.
The our allies have a range of different days
for recognizing service of their military forces, um,
forces Day, veterans Day, remembrance Day, Memorial Day.
But here in New Zealand, uh, we focus on Anzac Day
as a day to remember, in my view, all who have served.
And I include that view, not so much as the military's view,
but the wider population, the wider civilian population.
It's a day to reflect on everybody who has served.
And so if this amendment goes ahead, it's our view
that it creates, um, exclusion on two counts.
Now, those who don't have operational service,
but may have died during training are recognized.
And those who do not have operational service are still here
to remember, but are not recognized.
So we can remember those who served and died on training,
and I'm reminded of a, um, a chat Bob Carroll killed
by a tree in training in Malaya.
So his service, if we're going to look at the terms, um,
may well be recognized and his death on service recognized.
But those who served with them,
their service isn't recognized
or included in this amendment.
Um, as I say, for those that I served, um, with earlier
who served operationally, they are a remembered up
until Vietnam and the current legislation.
But my service and the service of many of those
that we represent, um, is not,
and this amendment doesn't change there.
Um, this, this is also the same for those
who have served post 1990.
So those who've served operationally in Afghanistan, Iraq,
Tim Leste, Bosnia, Somalia, Solomon Islands,
and so forth, their service is recognized,
but the comrades who served within the confines
of New Zealand, um, are not recognized.
And it's the same with those who served, um, during the,
served the country during the pandemic
and were deployed to MIQ facilities.
Their service is not recognized
and they're not included in this amendment.
Uh, so it's my submission that all ex service personnel need
to, um, be included, to be inclusive, um, as opposed
to having an arbitrary, uh, differentiation, which doesn't
actually foster unity, but more division.
Yes, we've got the, um, proposed Veterans Recognition bill.
Uh, but again, I don't think that's inclusive.
It's just, uh, another day that's added to
what is already a very special day in 2021.
Minister Ha awarded the New Zealand Operational Service
Medal to some four and a half thousand service personnel.
They don't have a com a, um, campaign medal,
nor do many of them have access to Veterans affairs,
health assistance or benefits
under the VSA 2014.
And their service under this amendment does not appear
to be recognized even though they have the
operational service medal.
That's how their service has been, uh, classified.
It doesn't go the full, um, nine yards for them.
If I look at my service
and I dig into the, um, the meaning under section two
of this amendment at a push, it could be included under the,
under that amendment as, um, my service was
during a period when an armed conflict had occurred.
So the Malayan emergency that had finished
and was still occurring under the second Malayan emergency
or insurgency between 1968
and 1989, uh, that was recognized
by the Malaysian government.
And that emergency under the leadership
of Qin Pen could have recurred.
So it's quite a very loose terminology.
Um, and lacks I think clarity.
Um, Xining eventually surrendered, um,
on the 2nd of December, 1989,
which coincidentally was about the time
that the New Zealand forces, uh, left Singapore, um,
at the same time, 1989.
So that's our submission.
Um, we think it can be tweaked
and I've made some recommendations, um,
and certainly I would support any inclusion of those
who served in New Zealand, um,
during the New Zealand Awards from both sides.
All right. Thank you very much for your
submission this afternoon.
Do we have questions? Yeah, Tim Ley.
Um, thank you for your submission
and the detail, which you went through the recent one.
I found it really helpful, especially your
reflections on the speeches.
It's, uh, much appreciated and I,
and I take the points you make in there.
I guess my question as you touched on it just at the end,
that we, we've heard from some of the view that this,
the way the legislation is written, it says, in,
in commemoration of all those
who have served New Zealand in time of war,
Anzac Day will be a commemoration, uh,
a day of commemoration.
And it's not specifically about recognizing some would
argue any individual.
It's about commemorating the service and conflict.
And we've heard from others it should be anyone
that died in uniform, whether
that was in a conflict zone or not.
And then the separate issue of
how do you recognize splitting out the recognition piece
into a separate rec um, veteran's Day.
Now, I, I heard you, you touched on that at the end, said,
well, it's just another day.
But do you think a, an all inclusive day
that recognizes every veteran are those like yourself who,
who as you say, and, and I thank you for your service.
'cause you put on the uniform, you turned up,
you did your training, and it was just at the whim
of the government, who, who was sent and who wasn't,
and when, when, you know, uh, a bit of a time and place.
So, um, does, does that help to recognize
all those who have served New Zealand having a separate
Veteran's Day, whether or not maybe they were in the 1980s
and New Zealand wasn't going anywhere.
Does that help?
I think the, the problem you've got there is that already
going around the traps listening to people, we've got,
oh yes, there, there might be a, a Veteran's Day,
but I'm a war veteran and you are not.
Mm. So there's differentiation already taking place in
people's minds, and we've got this day that's carry
so much impact in Anzac Day.
It's an appropriate time, in my view, in the view of our,
our committee that we recognize the, um, the service
of all service people.
All right. Well thank you very
much for your time this afternoon.
We really appreciate you making the effort
to submit and to speak to it.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Alright, that brings an end
to the public hearings on the Anzac a Amendment bill.